hi everyone
and thank you for joining us my name is
dr. Ross Tetzel I'm an equine
veterinarian based in Melbourne Victoria
in this video we are going to talk about
the common disorder of gastric ulcers in
horses what a gastric ulcers gastric
ulcers are wounds in the lining of the
stomach caused by acid how common are
they 53 percent to 100 percent of adult
race horses in training have asks 37
percent to 60 percent of show and
pleasure horses also have ulcers and in
foals we find up to 50 percent it's rare
in horses on pasture why you would ask
let's briefly explain the digestive
system the horse is a non-ruminant
herbivore which means it doesn't have a
room and like a cow but it eats grass
the horse is naturally a continuous
grazer wild horse has spent 16 hours a
day grazing and travel up to 20
kilometres while grazing they have a
simple stomach which has ten percent of
the capacity of the digestive tract and
is nine to fifteen liters in volume
enzymatic breakdown of food occurs in
the stomach and bacterial fermentation
in the large intestine the stomach has
three sections the non glandular called
the sack of seekers the esophageal
entrance which is the area affected by
acid and the glandular funding and
pyloric sections which are not generally
affected by acid
let's look at the causes the equine
stomach is adapted to constant intake of
feed so it's constantly secreting acid
adult horses secrete 30 litres of
gastric acid daily independent of feed
intake in the stomach the food is mixed
with pepsin an enzyme that digests
protein an asset that is involved in the
breakdown of solid particles when the
stomach is empty
it is therefore exposed to high levels
of acid as acid is continuously secreted
in the stomach whether there is feed
there or not acid produced in the
stomach is generally buffered by saliva
which contains a high concentration of
bicarbonate and mucus if access to feed
is reduced then saliva production is
greatly reduced and therefore greatly
reduces the buffering process the amount
of bicarbonate in saliva increases as
the amount of saliva produced increases
one kilogram of hay takes 3,000 chewing
movements and produces four liters of
saliva one kilogram of grain only takes
1000 chewing movements and produces 2
litres of saliva somebody spent a lot of
time counting acid damage is the main
cause of ulcers
other risk factors and how do we try and
reduce them physical stress relating to
overworking the horse illness that
reduces its immune system painful
musculoskeletal disorders such as tying
up an injury endometritis an infection
of the uterus in the mare behavioral
stress horses that are in stalls that
they're not used to stabled in an
environment that they're not used to
transported long distances without
brakes exercise has been shown to reduce
blood flow to the stomach lining as well
as increasing abdominal pressure this
may cause gastric compression in turn
forcing acid contents into the proximal
stomach drugs such as non-steroidal
anti-inflammatories phenylbutazone
flunixin melamine can be associated with
ulcers throughout the gastrointestinal
tract they work by inhibiting
prostaglandins which interrupts the
mucosal blood flow and also they stop
mucus production
let's look at the clinical signs of
horses with ulcers sadly they are vague
such things as loss of appetite decrease
in performance some discomfort and mild
or moderate colic poor body condition a
change in the horse's behavior he
suddenly becomes Moody where has been
Placid before just not looking right is
a common term that people say girthy
where the horse reacts when you're
applying the girth which is never done
before
so how do we diagnose if our horse has
got ulcers the clinical signs as we've
seen can be suggestive of ulcers but are
not specific response to treatment is
useful if we treat them with ulcer
treatment and they respond maybe they
had ulcers laboratory tests may reveal
occasionally a mild anemia but that
could be associated with any other
condition a definitive diagnosis is made
by gastroscopy here we use a gastro
scope a three metre long tube that has
passed through the nose and down into
the stomach similar to this where we can
visualize what is happening in the
stomach
so how do we treat ulcers at the moment
the gold standard in treatment is a
product called omeprazole this is a
proton pump inhibitor that heals ulcers
as well as preventing them in the past
most of the drugs were able to prevent
them but they didn't heal them it is
given once daily and is the treatment of
choice for most veterinarians
so what can we do to try and prevent the
horse getting ulcers firstly avoid long
periods without food so the empty
stomach is not exposed to high levels of
acid feed frequent small meals feed a
bleep hey if the feed is withheld the pH
in the stomach drops to 2 in 21 hours
and this causes ulcers I like to place
feed bins on the ground to stimulate the
horses normal grazing position feed a
small amount of loosen chaff prior to
work the reason for this is the winner
horse exercises on a normal stomach the
loosen in the stomach will bind with the
acid and also forms a physical barrier
avoid stress avoid long treatments with
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
such as phenylbutazone they damage the
mucosa and we end up with ulcers train
the horse from the paddock the reason
for this is he has continual grazing and
always has something in his stomach
you can still exercise a horse with
ulcers it doesn't affect the horses
ability to work it just affects the
horses attitude I hope this has in some
way helped you to understand why horses
get ulcers and how to treat them and
thank you very much for watching